---
layout: post
title: The Case for Computational History
date: 2019-04-03
description: Some thoughts and maybe a manifesto?
---

Today I want to make a case for something I call computational humanities (CH), which might be a weird choice considering the recent vitriol directed to CLS in the last few weeks. But seeing the responses on Twitter have actually made it clear to me that we need more conversations about what this field is and is not. Now I realize that what I'm calling computational humanities others call CLS, cultural analytics, or even digital humanities. I don't like any of these names as much as computational humanities, but regardless of the name, we need to discuss what this scholarship should look like, what methods define this field, and what sort of labor practices and ethics we should be using to undertake this work. I don't have definitive answers by any means, but I want to have this conversation. 

At the outset, I want to be clear I do not know most of these men in this field, and so I want to make space for the women calling out their previous behavior on twitter, especially the more serious charges of sexism. I think those accusations should be taken seriously, but I don't think the behavior of a few should be used to shut down an entire field of research. 

I've also appreciated that a lot of these debates have focused on the lack of the diversity in this field, which is both evidently true and also not a problem exclusive to DH. I think we need to call out this problem and the larger conditions that produce it, but also be careful to not reifying statistics or programming as 'masculine' spaces. I think the biggest barrier is that DH has outsourced its more advanced technical training to other fields like computer science or statistics, and with that choice we have allowed the structural problems in those fields to become our own. That's a choice that we can unmake with sufficient resources and support for teaching, especially for students who don't have technical backgrounds. But until we do, we'll end up with the people who are told they should like computers (cis white men) being the ones who do this work. 

In a lot of these critiques, there's also an implicit frustration with the current hierarchies that privilege those who do stats and coding over those who do other forms of digital scholarship - whether its making tools for scholars or collaborative public humanities projects (which to be clear is still only a small subset of the work that falls under DH). I understand these frustrations because I too do this work, and I have raged against these dismissals. Let's say it loud and proud, **THIS WORK IS SCHOLARSHIP**. But instead of trying to make everything fit in the same field, I think we need to start to disaggregate and valuing this work on its own terms.

For example, I think DH tool building and web apps needs to be evaluated more similarly to HCI and software development, and that there are a whole host of labor issues around this work in DH labs and other spaces that needs more serious discussion. I love building web apps but the sustainability of this work and the long-term careers of the people doing this work is not well suited to the boom and bust of the grant cycle model, and we need to talk more about how these individuals get credit for their intellectual labor. I also think collaborative public humanities scholarship needs to be evaluated through questions of UX, accessibility, and community engagement. I think narrowly defining scholarship as 'argument' undermines this extremely important work, but that this work also has issues around who gets to speak for a community and the power dynamics of digitization of resources. Also similar to DH tool building, the continuing reliance on precarious labor for data entry and cleaning is troubling. 

Fundamentally I think putting everything into the same giant bucket is causing problems. These fields and scholars deserve their own manifestos, and increasingly they exist. So instead of constantly calling out each subfield for not doing the work of the other subfield, I think the time has come (or maybe we've been here for some time) where we need to stop treating DH as the big tent, and start valuing these communities of praxis on their own terms or we'll be doomed to stay in DH of 2013. If we don't, we'll stay stuck in this perverse groundhog day type debates where we keep fighting over what is DH and what isn't, instead of engaging with the work we're already doing and trying to make it better. 

We also need to stop allowing critics to flatten these communities as a way to create neat straw men to represent an imagined DH. We are letting these critics debate us on why DH should exist, which is not a question we ask of any other field. I want to move this discussion away from why towards how one subset of DH should operate.

### So what follows is my vision for a field called Computational Humanities.

**Computational Humanities** is a scholarly community that applies statistics and computational methods, broadly defined, to undertake humanistic inquiry. This type of work might involve natural language processing or computer vision or network analysis or other computational methods, as well as statistical modeling in its various flavors. But this work differs from those fields in that we use them in an *applied way to humanities research questions*. The majority of computational humanities is not intended to move forward statistical modeling or generate new algorithms (though if you do major props!). Instead the field should be focused on evaluating: 

- the translation of humanities research questions into computationally tractable and testable hypotheses
- the suitability of the selected methods and the representativeness of our datasets for these research questions
- and finally the triangulation through multiple outputs of our findings, which should inform the strength of our conclusions.

This field should welcome null results because those are foundational to the experimental process, but we also should be comfortable critiquing when necessary. This field should not privilege individual work over collaboration, but there should also be clear ways to evaluate divisions of labor. Outsourcing these methods to another scholar or field should not be the answer. Working in this field involves engaging meaningfully with statistical and computational methods. Whether you need to code or not remains an open question, but if you don't understand these methods you will not understand how they should be applied. 

This field should involve making our assumptions transparent and our work reproducible, but also acknowledges the difficulties involved in these efforts. Making compelling narratives while talking about methods is hard, as is managing coding infrastructure. Personally, I would also love to see more work devoted to creating code libraries and supporting existing open sourced languages and libraries that we all depend on, but we can debate that later.

Katherine Bode in her responses in the CI forum rightly brought up the role of dataset curation and large digital repositories in computational work. I think dataset curation is an incredibly important part of computational humanities, but I'm also not sure whether each scholar should have to recreate the infrastructure necessary to do the work of digitizing sources (although full disclosure I did create my own web application solely for this issue). I do think computational humanities needs to be critical of datasets and their assumptions, but solving this larger issue of creating new data involves the work of multiple sub-fields of DH, and especially librarians and archivists. I think one the biggest struggles for each sub-field in DH is to start to delineate what is within their purview versus what should inform their research. 

To that end, I see computational humanities as being evaluated similarly to computational social science and data journalism in that you need statistical evaluation and interpretative narrative to make scholarship. This requires a lot of time and effort that doesn't neatly fit within the current model of the humanities. So we need to start making more realistic expectations and timelines for this scholarship. I also think we need to do more to help non-computational humanists to evaluate our work. I don't want to reify this divide, but I also think it's unfair to both sides not to acknowledge it. 

That's why I think we need computational humanities. So that when I publish a graph, you, fellow computational humanist, know that I've made a hundred before it and understand the labor involved. When I use one method over another, you can understand and evaluate my choices. The most frustrating part of this work is not having people engage with it. **So let's critique one another, but make sure we are do so generously and with the aim of improving each other's work**. 

Also let's create some curriculum and programs that actually teaches these methods so that the next generation can be more diverse, which will only improve upon existing scholarship. Also let's strive not to erase other people's labor that makes this work possible, and highlight the work of other fields that inform this scholarship. Finally, let's not fall into the trap of creating false hierarchies in DH. Computational humanities is not DH writ large, nor is it superior in any way to other DH sub-discipline. 

My vision for this field has a long way to go before we're there. But I do think we can get there.